1Every cat’s nose print is unique. RyanJLane//Getty Images Just like a human's fingerprint, a cat’s nose has a one-of-a-kind pattern of bumps and ridges that is totally unique to it alone. “No two cats have the same design,” says Dr. Vaid.

2Cats aren’t nocturnal—they’re crepuscular. Westend61//Getty Images Cats are most active at dawn and dusk, mirroring the hunting patterns of their wild ancestors. You might notice bursts of energy during these hours, followed by long naps throughout the day. This is called being crepuscular and it’s their natural rhythm, not just a spot of midnight mischief.

3Cats don’t always land on their feet. Tuul & Bruno Morandi//Getty Images While cats do have an incredible “righting reflex” that helps them twist midair, they’re not immune to injury like the myth says. Falls from moderate heights can cause serious harm, and even agile cats need to be protected from dangerous drops.

4Cats can’t taste sweetness. Priscila Zambotto//Getty Images Cats are carnivores with taste buds that reflect their dietary requirements. Unlike humans (or, say, dogs), they can’t detect sweetness at all. Since they lack sugar receptors, that piece of cake or scoop of ice cream you’re enjoying doesn’t tempt your cat in the slightest. (But the tuna sandwich is another matter!)

5Calico and tortoiseshell cats are almost always female. Nathalie Dupont//Getty Images It's all down to the X chromosome, which is where coat color genes are carried. Only female cats (with two X chromosomes) can display both orange and black patches.

6Orange tabbies are more likely to be male. SBenitez//Getty Images About 80 percent of orange cats are male. That same quirk of the X chromosome is what makes it far less common for female cats to be entirely orange, because both of their X chromosomes need to have the orange coat gene for them to not be calico. (If your orange cat is female, she is a rare queen!)

7Cats meow only for humans. Suzanne Marshall//Getty Images Here's a fact that might blow your mind: “Cats never meow at each other,” says Dr. Vaid. “It’s a behavior they developed to communicate specifically with people.” Have multiple cats at home? Observe them and test it out.

8Cats recognize their names (they just may not care). Anadolu//Getty Images Research shows that cats can distinguish their own names from other words. Whether they respond depends on their mood and motivation. In other words, they can hear and understand you, they just don't care to listen. Don’t take it personally!

9A cat’s purr may have healing powers. Anadolu//Getty Images A cat’s purr vibrates between 25 and 150 hertz—a frequency range shown to promote tissue and bone healing. Some researchers believe these soothing vibrations may even have calming, restorative effects for humans who spend time around purring cats.

10When cats knead or "make biscuits," they feel safe. kelly bowden//Getty Images Making biscuits, making muffins...you may call that charming kneading tendency by any number of cute names. In fact, kneading mimics the motion kittens use to nurse. “It’s a comforting behavior that signals security and relaxation,” says Dr. Vaid.

11Boxes lower feline stress. FilippoBacci//Getty Images As the meme goes, "If it fits, I sits!" Confined spaces provide security for cats, helping them feel safe and calm. Studies show that cats given access to boxes adjust faster to new environments, such as shelters or new homes. A simple cardboard box can be a powerful stress reliever.

12Purring doesn’t always mean happiness. Anita Kot//Getty Images Most of us associate a purring cat with a pure expression of joy... and that can be the case. But cats also purr when stressed or in pain. “It’s a self-soothing mechanism,” Dr. Vaid explains, much like humming to calm ourselves.

13Slow blinking is a love language. Laura Stolfi//Getty Images When a cat gives you that adorable slow blink of the eyes, it’s actually a way of communicating love. This gentle eye movement is a sign of deep trust and affection. Try blinking slowly right back at your cat to return the love... it’s the closest thing to a cat’s version of a warm smile.

14Whiskers are high-tech sensors. Nina Pearman//Getty Images Whiskers can detect subtle changes in the air, helping cats move confidently and accurately even when they find themselves navigating in darkness or in tight spaces. “They’re like built-in radar,” explains Dr. Vaid.

15Tail wagging signals irritation, not joy. Laura Stolfi//Getty Images A cat’s tail can reveal its mood, and a flicking one usually signals irritation or overstimulation. “It’s the opposite of a happy dog tail,” explains Dr. Vaid. If you see that sharp, twitchy movement, it could be your cue to give your feline some space.

16Cats are not indifferent to us. Images By Tang Ming Tung//Getty Images Cats may seem self sufficient—and have earned a reputation for aloofness to match—but they need regular engagement to stay happy. “Without attention, cats can become bored or lonely,” says Dr. Vaid. Daily playtime and affection aren’t just fun little extras for you, they’re essential for your cat’s emotional wellbeing, too.

17Cats need to “hunt,” even indoors. Wildroze//Getty Images “Cats need outlets for natural instincts,” says Dr. Guilfoyle. “Toys that mimic hunting (think puzzle feeders or toy mice) help satisfy their urge to stalk and chase.” These activities keep cats mentally sharp, physically active, and safely entertained indoors.

18Peeing outside the litter box isn’t just bad behavior. CasarsaGuru//Getty Images It may be stressful for a pet parent, but it's not something to just chalk up to naughtiness. Changes in behavior, such as excessive licking, hiding, or avoiding the litter box, can point to stress, anxiety, or an underlying medical issue like arthritis or a urinary tract infection. “Never ignore this red flag,” warns Dr. Vaid—call your vet.

19Cats love having choices. Purple Collar Pet Photography//Getty Images “Cats feel safest when they have control,” Dr. Guilfoyle explains. Offering multiple resting spots or scratching posts for them to choose between helps prevent stress. A further note about scratching: Scratching is communication, not (just) destruction. Cats leave both visual and scent marks when they scratch, which is perfectly normal territorial behavior.

20Exposing their belly isn’t (necessarily) an invitation for rubs. Peter Evans//Getty Images When a cat shows its belly, it’s a sign of trust, not an invitation to touch. (Even though it's tempting!) Their most sensitive area is off-limits for most felines. Instead, offer affection with gentle scratches on the head, cheeks, or under the chin. Alesandra is a digital travel and lifestyle journalist based in Los Angeles whose work has appeared in Good Housekeeping, Woman’s Day, Prevention, Insider, Glamour, Shondaland, AFAR, Parents, TODAY and countless other online and print outlets. Alesandra has a masters degree in journalism with an emphasis on cultural reporting and criticism from NYU, and a bachelor’s degree from UC Berkeley. An avid traveler, she trots the globe with her husband and their twins.
