
1. What do you call a group of cats?
A group of adult cats is called a ‘clowder’. The word ‘clowder’ has roots in Middle English, which is a form of English that was spoken after 1066 until the late 1400s.
Other ways of referring to a group of domestic cats include ‘clutter’ and ‘glaring’. Groups of wild or feral cats can be known as a ‘dowt’ or ‘destruction’, whereas a group of kittens is called a ‘kindle’.

2. Cats have super kidneys
Feline kidneys have a special ability; they can filter salt out of water!
Please note: Although their kidneys are efficient at separating salt from water, your cat should never be allowed to drink salt water or sea water.

3. Your cat has evolved to communicate with you
Domestic cats have evolved to create vocalisations that match the frequency of a human baby’s cry, just to get your attention!
Along with purring, mewing, and meowing, studies have shown that felines also use slow blinking as a positive form of communication with humans.

4. Mayor Stubbs of Talkeetna was a cat
In 1997, close-knit communities in the town of Talkeetna (in Alaska) voted for Stubbs the cat to be their honorary mayor. Stubbs ‘served’ as mayor of Talkeetna for 20 years!
To capture the hearts of his voters, Stubbs set up office in a local shop; where he’d greet visitors and befriend tourists.

5. The dangerous diet of desert-dwelling cats
The ‘sand cat’, a cousin of your domesticated cat, can survive in extreme desert environments for months without water! Instead of drinking water every day, the sand cat can get all the nutrients they need from their prey.
Please note: Your cat should always have access to fresh, clean water. Domestic cats are unable to survive without water, and they should drink around 20-90ml of water every day – the equivalent to one-and-a-half espresso cups!

6. Tiny Tinker Toy
Born on Christmas Day in 1990, a blue-point Himalayan-Persian cat named Tinker Toy became the smallest cat on record. Tinker Toy, from Illinois, reached just 7cm in height and 19cm in length by the time he was two-and-a-half years old!
To give you an idea of Tinker Toy’s size, he was a similar height to a ballpoint pen, and about the length of a standard adult toothbrush.

7. Ancient Egyptian cats
Cats were believed to be magical creatures in ancient Egypt, and people considered themselves lucky if they had a feline friend. In fact, if an ancient Egyptian’s cat passed away, the owner would shave their eyebrows off and mourn until their eyebrows grew back!
Also, since cats were considered gods and goddesses, if a criminal harmed or killed a cat in ancient Egypt, that person would face the death penalty.

8. Milk is unsuitable for cats
Many of our feline friends are lactose intolerant.
Just like humans who are lactose intolerant, most cats don’t have the lactase enzyme required to digest the lactose (sugar) found in milk. Additionally, a small dish of milk for a cat is the equivalent to you eating a large cheesy pizza in one sitting!

9. Sleep is essential for kittens
As newborns, and until they’re around two weeks old, kittens can sleep for up to 22 hours a day! But, it’s important never to wake them, since all that time spent dreaming is vital for your kitten’s healthy growth and development.
If you notice your kitten lacks energy and still seems sleepy after waking from a long nap, it could be a sign something isn’t quite right – so, please speak to your vet.

10. Cats may be able to navigate using Earth’s magnetic field
Does your feline friend have an in-built GPS?
Some scientists believe that cats can detect Earth’s electromagnetic waves (also known as ‘magnetoreception’) and even use that frequency to guide them home! Although research is ongoing, it’s clear we still have a lot to learn about our feline friends’ mysteriously brilliant sense of direction.

11. Felines don’t have a sweet tooth
While it’s unimaginable for those of us who love sweet treats, our feline friends can’t taste sugar! Unlike our omnivorous diet packed with variety, cats are completely carnivorous and are driven to seek meat to eat because that’s what keeps them healthy.
However, despite our cats finding meaty meals the tastiest, they’re all individuals – so, it’s still possible for your feline friend to enjoy sweet, cat-friendly treats from time to time.

12. Your feline friend can create an amazing array of vocal sounds
Compared to our canine companions, who are believed to make five basic sounds (varying in pitch, duration, and frequency), our feline friends are said to have 21 different vocalisations!
It’s thanks to their brilliant ability to adapt their voice that our cats are able to communicate effectively with us.

13. They have a special gait
Your cat’s walking style is more of a ‘pace’ – since their front and back legs move forward in tandem, instead of in diagonal pairs; the way your dog walks. Their gait (way of moving) at a walking pace – with their hind paws following their front paws, instead of working in diagonal pairs – helps to conserve energy while hunting.
Other animals who ‘pace’, like cats do, include camels and Icelandic ponies!

14. Cats can use their whiskers to measure space
Those little hairs that brush up against your face during kitty snuggles are super important to your cat.
Whiskers are connected to your feline friend’s nervous system, which sends messages about their environment to their brain. So, when their whiskers brush up against their surroundings, your cat can work out whether they’re able to fit through a small space!

15. Left-pawed, right-pawed
Which paw does your cat use to reach for their favourite toy, or to tap something off a shelf? A scientific study discovered that male cats prefer using their left paw, whereas female felines are generally right-pawed!
It’s helpful to know whether your cat is left-pawed or right-pawed, because that trait can be linked to their personality; it’s believed left-pawed pets are slightly flightier, for example.

16. Their memory is like yours!
Researchers in Japan discovered that cats are able access memories of past events, in much the same way as humans and dogs can!
Since it’s now understood that our feline friends can use memory for amusement, as well as to remember specific information, researchers believe that cats daydream – just like we do.

17. They use grooming to regulate temperature
During the summer, your cat can stay cool by licking their coat and letting their saliva evaporate. Whereas in winter, some cats might flatten their coat while grooming, to keep themselves insulated against the cold.
Please note: If your cat is grooming themselves excessively, or they stop grooming themselves properly, you’ll need to take them to the vet for a health check.

18. Origins of the Eqyptian Mau
Although you might associate the word ‘Mau’ with the beautiful spotted cat breed, did you know that ‘mau’ was the ancient Egyptian word for ‘cat’?
It’s believed that the Mau breed is a descendant of ancient Egyptian cats, who had similar spotted markings and formed close bonds with humans.

19. Creator of the cat flap
Sir Isaac Newton may have discovered gravity, though he also invented the cat flap!
While working on experiments, Newton became fed up with being disturbed whenever his cat – Spithead – asked to be let out. So, Newton cut a hole in the door and placed a cloth over it, to allow Spithead to wander in and out of the room whenever he wanted.

20. You have more in common with your cat than you’d think
Dogs may be considered man’s best friend, though it’s your feline friend whose brain structure is 90% similar to yours!
Cats tend to use the visual section of their brains more than most other mammals, which could be the secret behind their ability to capture the human heart.

21. Moggies are mid-sighted
Your curious cat can’t focus on objects directly in front of their nose! Luckily, cats have whiskers to detect anything they struggle to see in front of them.
However, your feline friend may also find it difficult to see objects clearly when they’re more than 20 feet away – which is why cats are considered ‘mid-sighted’.

22. They don’t just use their nose to pick up scents
Thanks to the Jacobson’s organ (located between the roof of their mouth and their nostrils), your cat can detect a new scent by drawing it into their mouth.
Through having a highly developed sense of smell, your feline friend can use scent to investigate their environment and communicate with other cats.

23. How high can a cat jump?
Long before they were domesticated (and learned to control humans), cats had to jump into trees to protect themselves from predators. Times have changed, however, so our feline friends now use their astounding ability to access off-limits kitchen counters that may be full of tasty treats!
It’s believed that most cats can jump up to about five or six times their own body length.

24. Spy cat
In the 1960s, $20 million was spent on a top-secret CIA research project that involved sending a cat to spy on enemies. After five years working on the project, scientists manage to implant a microphone into a cat’s ear canal. Sadly, the poor cat who was the focus of ‘Project Acoustic Kitty’ was hit by a car during their first field test.
Thankfully, after the failure of their project to train a cat as a superspy, the CIA decided against using cats as spies.

25. Can all cats purr?
Smaller cats can purr, but big cats cannot! The only exception to this rule is the cheetah – a big cat capable of purring, yet incapable of producing a loud roar.
As well as your feline friend, other cats who can purr include bobcats, ocelots, and cougars. Whereas big cats, like lions, tigers, and leopards, can roar instead of purr.

26. Keeping your cat cosy is important
Many of our cats may have thick coats, but that doesn’t mean they’re able to stay warm when the weather is cold. Should your cat’s coat get wet during winter, it’ll prevent them from trapping heat in to regulate their body temperature.
If temperatures drop below 7°C, your cat should be kept indoors (unless they have a warm, dry shelter outside) because they’ll be at greater risk of health problems otherwise.

27. The trichobezoar
Despite sounding like a type of dinosaur, ‘trichobezoar’ is the scientific name for your cat’s hairball!
‘Trich’ means ‘hair’ and ‘bezoar’ describes an obstruction of the stomach or intestines.

28. Cats vs. weasels
In ancient Rome, people preferred pet weasels because they were great at catching rodents – that was, until the Romans realised cats are cleaner than their small, carnivorous counterparts!
Even today, over 100 feral cats roam their very own ancient temple in Rome.

29. Feline ear furnishings
Those little tufts of hair poking out of your cat’s ears are called ‘ear furnishings’.
Feline breeds who are famous for their cute ear furnishings include the ragdoll, Main Coon, and Norwegian Forest cat.

30. Fenrir of Michigan
Recorded as being the tallest cat in the world, Fenrir measured a whopping 18.83 inches in height! The equivalent to Fenrir’s height would be three large TV remotes placed in a line.
Fenrir, the F2 (second generation) Savannah cat, isn’t just a world record-breaker – he also works as a therapy cat, helping his owner’s patients feel calmer when they visit the doctor’s practice.
